[docs] Use slot variants over `theme.variants` (#42614)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/material/customization/theme-components/theme-components.md

## Theme style overrides

> The theme's `styleOverrides` key makes it possible to potentially change the default styles of any Material UI component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The theme's `styleOverrides` key makes it possible to change the default styles of any Material UI component.
```

> The theme's `styleOverrides` key makes it possible to potentially change the default styles of any Material UI component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The theme's `styleOverrides` key makes it possible to change the default styles of any Material UI component.
```

> The `styleOverrides` requires a slot name as a key (use `root` for targeting the outer-most element), and an object with CSS properties as a value. Nested CSS selectors are supported as a value too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `styleOverrides` requires a slot name as a key (use `root` to target the outer-most element) and an object with CSS properties as a value. Nested CSS selectors are also supported as values.
```

> The `styleOverrides` requires a slot name as a key (use `root` for targeting the outer-most element), and an object with CSS properties as a value. Nested CSS selectors are supported as a value too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `styleOverrides` requires a slot name as a key (use `root` for targeting the outer-most element), and an object with CSS properties as a value.
Nested CSS selectors are supported as a value too.
```

{{"demo": "GlobalThemeOverride.js"}}

Each component is composed of several different slots.
These slots correspond to classes that are available to the component—see the **CSS** section of the component's API page for a detailed list.
You can use these classes inside the `styleOverrides` key to modify the corresponding slots of the component.

> ### Overrides based on props

Reviewer 3: I don't have a great idea now, but I'm not sure "Overrides based on props" is the best title for this section, mostly because we're not just talking about _overrides_, we're also talking about _additions_ (adding a new prop to a component, which is different from changing something that already existed—an override).

Author: I'm changing to "Variants" based on @aarongarciah [comment](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/42614#discussion_r1639729803).

> Each slot of the component's `styleOverrides` supports a `variants` key. Variants are sets of overrides applied to the slot when the specified props match.
> 
> The definitions are specified in an array. Make sure the styles that should take precedence are listed last.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most components support props that exist to change their design.
For example, the Card component supports a `variant` prop where you can pick `outlined` as a value that adds a border.

If you want to override a value from a specific prop, target it via the `styleOverrides` key in the theme.
This will add any new CSS you write on top of the default styles.

The override definition must specified in an array.
Also, ensure that any styles that should take precedence are listed last.
```

Maybe something more tutorial-y like this and less abstract? "Each slot's of the components' styleOverrides support a variants key" sounded so challenging 😅

**Example 1**: Overriding styles based on existing props. To increase the border thickness of the `outlined` Card, use this following snippet:

```js
const theme = createTheme({
  components: {
    MuiCard: {
      styleOverrides: {
        root: {
          variants: [
            {
              props: { variant: 'outlined' },
              style: {
                borderWidth: '3px',
              },
            },
          ],
        },
      },
    },
  },
});
```

> **Example 2**: Overriding styles based on new values. If your project needs a new Button's variant, use the following snippet:

Reviewer 3: For example, this doesn't feel like an override to me—it's a completely new thing that we're adding to the component's surface area.

Author: It's hard to justify. Even though it's about adding new value, it's potentially overriding the default styles of the Button.

{{"demo": "GlobalThemeOverride.js"}}

### Variants

> Most components support props that exist to change their design.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most components include design-related props that affect their appearance.
```

For example, the Card component supports a `variant` prop where you can pick `outlined` as a value that adds a border.

> If you want to override styles from a specific prop, create `variants` of the specific slot that contains `props` and `style` keys. When the component's `props` matches, the `style` will be applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to override styles based on a specific prop, you can use the `variants` on the particular slot that contains `props` and `style` keys. When the component's `props` matches, the `style` will be applied.
```

> The override definition must specified in an array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The override definition must be specified in an array.
```

> The override definition must specified in an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Override definitions are specified as an array.
```

Also, ensure that any styles that should take precedence are listed last.

> **Example 1**: Overriding styles based on existing props. To increase the border thickness of the `outlined` Card, use this following snippet:

Reviewer: I think we could use regular headings and remove "Example X", which is not very informative. It'd probably require reword some of the paragraphs.

```suggestion
#### Overriding styles based on existing props

To increase the border thickness of the `outlined` Card, use the following snippet:
```

Author: Updated the rest as well, thanks.

> These parts correspond to classes that are available to the component—see the **CSS** section of the component's API page for a detailed list.

Author: Good point.

You can use these classes inside the `styleOverrides` key to modify the corresponding parts of the component.

### Overrides based on props

Each slot of the component's `styleOverrides` support a key of `variants`. Variants are sets of overrides when the specified props are matched.

> The definitions are specified in an array with sensitive order, so make sure that the styles that should win are specified last.

Reviewer: Maybe we can omit the "sensitive order" bit, because by itself doesn't mean anything. The next sentence already gives the necessary information.

```suggestion
The definitions are specified in an array. Make sure the styles that should take precedence are listed last.
```

```js
const theme = createTheme({
  components: {
    MuiButton: {
      styleOverrides: {
        root: {
          variants: [
            {
              props: { variant: 'dashed' },
              style: {
                textTransform: 'none',
                border: `2px dashed ${blue[500]}`,
              },
            },
            {
              props: { variant: 'dashed', color: 'secondary' },
              style: {
                border: `4px dashed ${red[500]}`,
              },
            },
          ],
        },
      },
    },
  },
});
```

> If you're using TypeScript, you'll need to specify your new variants/colors, using [module augmentation](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/declaration-merging.html#module-augmentation).

Reviewer 2: I would recommend having two separate sections as before, so it's easier to search for custom variants for example. If people are not looking for custom variant, it is surprising why they would see variant 'dashed' in this demo.

Author: To be honest, I am opposed to that idea, that's why I removed it.

"Overrides based on props" is what users want, "Creating new variants" is our technical term.

Users should learn that if they want to override CSS based on props, they should use `variants` but not the other way around.

However, adding `variants` to the title could help users that already familiar with the word find this section faster. So how about changing it to `Overrides based on props using variants`? Any thoughts @samuelsycamore?

Author: I added more examples instead, can you check them first.

Reviewer: > "Overrides based on props" is what users want, "Creating new variants" is our technical term.

I don't think "Creating new variants" is our technical term. The term "variants" is now standard across the industry and mainstream design tools like Figma use it. So I think "adding/removing variants" is a correct mental model for many users.

_For another PR:_ I think we should mention how to remove variants.

Author: > "variants" is now standard across the industry and mainstream design tools like Figma use it

Sounds reasonable to me. Then it's better to change `Overrides based on props` to `Creating new variants`.

<!-- Tested with packages/mui-material/test/typescript/augmentation/themeComponents.spec.ts -->

```tsx
declare module '@mui/material/Button' {
  interface ButtonPropsVariantOverrides {
    dashed: true;
  }
}
```

{{"demo": "GlobalThemeVariants.js"}}

> The variant `props` can also be defined as a callback.
> This is useful if you want to apply styles when using negation in the condition.
> In other words, applying a different style if a particular property doesn't have a specific value.

Reviewer: Maybe better?

```suggestion
The variant `props` can also be defined as a callback, allowing you to apply styles based on negation conditions. This is useful for styling when a property does not have a specific value.
```

Author: I remove the `negation` to cover all other conditions.

          variants: [
            {
              props: (props) =>
                props.variant === 'dashed' && props.color !== 'secondary',
              style: {
                textTransform: 'none',
                border: `2px dashed ${blue[500]}`,
              },
            },
          ],
        },
      },
    },
  },
});
```

#### Slot ownerState callback

Using callback to access slot's `ownerState` has been deprecated. Consider migrating to `variants` using the codemod below:

```bash
npx @mui/codemod@next v6.0.0/theme-v6 <path/to/theme>
```

```diff
 const finalTheme = createTheme({
   components: {
     MuiSlider: {
       styleOverrides: {
-        valueLabel: ({ ownerState, theme }) => ({
-          ...(ownerState.orientation === 'vertical' && {
-            backgroundColor: 'transparent',
-            color: theme.palette.grey[500],
-          }),
-        }),
+        valueLabel: {
+          variants: [
+            props: { orientation: 'vertical' },
+            style: ({ theme }) => ({
+              backgroundColor: 'transparent',
+              color: theme.palette.grey[500],
+            }),
+          ],
+        }
       },
     },
   },
 });

> ```

Reviewer: Should this be added to https://mui.com/material-ui/migration/migrating-from-deprecated-apis? If we want to keep it here, I think we can just link to the Migration page and keep it short, removing the bash command and the example.

Author: Link to the migration works for me.

If you use the theming approach to customize the components, you'll still be able to override them using the `sx` prop as it has a higher CSS specificity, even if you're using the experimental `sx` syntax within the theme.

> ## Creating new component variants

Reviewer: I think it was clearer what it was possible to achieve by having a dedicated section on how to add new variants. How can users add new variants now that variants are only accessible through slots? By adding new variants to the `root` slots?

Author: > how can users add new variants now that variants are only accessible through slots? By adding new variants to the root slots?

Yes, that's correct. I wonder if the `### Overrides based on props` is not clear? I feel like the question contains answer in itself "how can users add new variants now that variants are only accessible through slots".

Reviewer: > I feel like the question contains answer in itself

It wasn't clear to me because I'm not familiar with the implementation. I think the mental model was clearer when using:

```js
MuiButton: {
  variants: [
    {
      props: { variant: 'dashed' },
      style: { ... }
    }
  ]
}
```

because you're adding a variant to the component, which is how users and tools treat variants.

Adding a variant to a slot is conceptually different from adding it to the component, and I can see how it can cause some confusion and doubts.

```js
MuiButton: {
  styleOverrides: {
    root: {
      variants: [
        {
          props: { variant: 'dashed' },
          style: { ... }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Question users might have:

"Are all new variant values declared in all slots available when instantiating the component? Or only the ones added to the `root` slot?"

Author: I see. This is Material UI v6 specific, users will need to learn that a component is composed of 1 or more slots. They should be customizing the styles of component's slot (a mapping to DOM element).

The `props` they specified in each of variant will match with the component props (all slots receive the same props).

![image](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/assets/18292247/373626b2-249a-424d-9765-af14bcb58af0)

I listed the benefits of targeting slot than the component in https://github.com/mui/material-ui/issues/30412#issuecomment-1894892080.
